Student Handbook
Class XNSQF Level-2BASIC 
AGRICUL TUREBASIC 
AGRICUL TURE
BASIC  
AGRICULTURE
Student Handbook
NSQF Level  – 2
Class
xBasic Agriculture
Student Handbook, Class XPrice: ` First Edition:Copies: Paper Used: 80 Gsm CBSE Water Mark White Maplitho
“This book or part thereof may not be reproduced by 
any person or agency in any manner.”
Published By :The Secretary, Central Board of Secondary Education,  
Shiksha Kendra, 2, Community Centre, Preet Vihar,  
Delhi - 110092
Designed & Layo
dary Education,  
Shiksha Kendra, 2, Community Centre, Preet Vihar,  
Delhi - 110092
Designed & Layout by :India Offset Press, A-1, Mayapuri Indl. Area, Ph-I, N.D. - 110064  
www.indiaoffsetpress.com
Printed By :M/s. Preface
Agriculture is the backbone of Indian economy, as we are growing hundreds of cereals, pulses, oil 
seeds, fruits and vegetables. In addition, rearing of milch animals, fishes, honeybees and silk worms has become an integral part of our economy. By virtue of hard work of the 
 honeybees and silk worms has become an integral part of our economy. By virtue of hard work of the Agricultural Scientists and farmers, we have attained green revolution, white revolution, brown revolution and golden revolution. Now, we are talking of rainbow revolution and it is hoped that we are approaching towards it with great sincerity and the day is not far when we will achieve it. Now, mushroom growing, honeybee rearing (Apiculture), sericulture, aquaculture, dairying, piggery, ornamenta
hroom growing, honeybee rearing (Apiculture), sericulture, aquaculture, dairying, piggery, ornamental fish culture, processing of fruits and vegetables are few important areas where our policy makers and planners are giving utmost attention. Therefore, our students should have some preliminary knowledge on these aspects.
Considering the importance of Agriculture, CBSE has introduced some preliminary courses entitled 
‘Basic Agriculture’ for class X students under NSQF. So that students could und
ry courses entitled 
‘Basic Agriculture’ for class X students under NSQF. So that students could understand something about Agriculture at entry level. This course has been introduced with the following objectives:
u To create awareness about cereals, pulses, oilseed crops, important fruits, vegetables and flowers.
u To create awareness about various breeds of animals, poultry, fushes and their importance.
u To impart knowledge about package of practices for growing various crops.
u To impart ba
portance.
u To impart knowledge about package of practices for growing various crops.
u To impart basic knowledge on major insect-pests and diseases of various crops, animals and measures to protect them by various means.
u To create awareness about post-harvest management, value addition and its importance in our daily life.
u To provide basis knowledge on entrepreneurship skill in different Agri-Business.
I am fully confident that after getting basic knowledge, students will get several ideas 
